<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">

<head>
    <meta charset="utf-8" />
    <title>Bursting the Bubble</title>
</head>

<body epub:type="chapter">

    <h1>Bursting the Bubble</h1>

    <p>From a strength of 6,031 members in 200 branches at its modern peak in September 1967, the Young Communist League
        ended the Eighties as an extinct force, long before the end of Eastern European Communist governments. The
        confusion, disappointment and despair arising from all this enabled the Communist Party of Great Britain, by a
        majority vote in its final Congress to vote itself out of existence. But it had been bereft of a <abbr
            title="Young Communist League">YCL</abbr> for the
        best part of a decade earlier. How had such a situation arisen? Why a study of the <abbr
            title="Young Communist League">YCL</abbr>?
    </p>
    <p>The <abbr title="Young Communist League">YCL</abbr> largely mirrored - sometimes in advance - the decline of the
        Communist Party. The "adult" body had
        30,000 members in 1,200 branches in the mid-Sixties, yet entered the Nineties with less than four thousand
        members. The problems faced by the <abbr title="Young Communist League">YCL</abbr> had been the same as those
        faced by the Party, yet interestingly the
        youth organisation anticipated its "parent" body by several years in parallel circumstances. There is a sense in
        which the <abbr title="Communist Party of Great Britain">CPGB</abbr> leadership "experimented" with the <abbr
            title="Young Communist League">YCL</abbr> before trying
        out ideas inside the Party itself.
        Therefore, in this case, to understand the child is to understand the parent. Not the least since many key
        figures in the leadership who presided over the <abbr title="Young Communist League">YCL</abbr>'s demise, were
        later to become part of the Party's
        leadership at its very core.
    </p>
    <p>This section of the CP's leadership provided much of the leadership of Democratic Left, the rump, revisionist
        organisation which the <abbr title="Communist Party of Great Britain">CPGB</abbr> transformed itself into during
        the 1990s. This body has now voted itself out of
        existence, after an inglorious period of continuing to disseminate confusion. Whilst the considerable assets of
        the <abbr title="Communist Party of Great Britain">CPGB</abbr> remain in the hands of a tiny element constituted
        as a “network” in support of “pluralist politics”!
        The very name of the <abbr title="Communist Party of Great Britain">CPGB</abbr> has become purloined by a
        handful of strange ultra-leftist, unconnected with its
        illustrious namesake’s past. The historic <abbr title="Communist Party of Great Britain">CPGB</abbr> (but not
        its youth wing) has now become the preserve of writers,
        in search of new territory for PhDs and their by-products, who rarely acknowledge the re-establishment of its
        finest traditions as the Communist Party of Britain. This was itself the product of attempts to prevent the
        Party from going the way of the YCL GB. In recent years, a renewed <abbr
            title="Young Communist League">YCL</abbr> has once again been established as the
        parallel youth organisation of the CPB. A study of the <abbr title="Young Communist League">YCL</abbr> in its
        final years thus repays itself for those who
        are interested, in a deeper understanding of the suicidal and homicidal tendencies displayed within the <abbr
            title="Communist Party of Great Britain">CPGB</abbr> in
        its own last years.
    </p>
    <p>The beginnings of the end are to be clearly identified in the 1960s. Yet this decade was a period of growth for
        the <abbr title="Young Communist League">YCL</abbr>. It would be followed by a period of intense decline in the
        1970s. As a result, its 1960 membership of
        1,796 was roughly equalled in 1976. The 1960s boom followed a difficult period. Membership had fallen
        dramatically from the 1957 figure of 3,000, reflecting the problems after the Khrushchev revelations over Stalin
        and the events in Hungary. A clear period of growth took place as the Communist movement began a process of
        recovery. By 1962 the <abbr title="Young Communist League">YCL</abbr> was a third larger than it had been a mere
        five years before and it more or less held
        on to the gains for a short period. But, during the course of 1965 the <abbr
            title="Young Communist League">YCL</abbr> grew by around a quarter-fold and the
        trend to expansion seemed to be holding steady.</p>
    <table>
        <caption>YCL national membership 1957-67. Figures are for November of each year, except for October 1967.
        </caption>
        <thead>
            <tr>
                <th>Year</th>
                <th>Membership</th>
            </tr>
        </thead>
        <tbody>
            <tr>
                <td>1957</td>
                <td>3,000</td>
            </tr>
            <tr>
                <td>1959</td>
                <td>1,700</td>
            </tr>
            <tr>
                <td>1960</td>
                <td>1,796</td>
            </tr>
            <tr>
                <td>1961</td>
                <td>2,702</td>
            </tr>
            <tr>
                <td>1962</td>
                <td>4,019</td>
            </tr>
            <tr>
                <td>1963</td>
                <td>3,989</td>
            </tr>
            <tr>
                <td>1965</td>
                <td>4,276</td>
            </tr>
            <tr>
                <td>1966</td>
                <td>5,420</td>
            </tr>
            <tr>
                <td>1967</td>
                <td>6,031</td>
            </tr>
        </tbody>
    </table>

    <p>The growing popularity of <abbr title="Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament">CND</abbr> and the struggles of
        engineering apprentices contributed much to this. In
        retrospect 1967 was the beginning of a terminal slide to self-induced oblivion. 1966-7 was ostensibly a good
        period for recruitment, membership lifting by 611 from 5,420. Yet there are reasons to seriously query the
        accuracy of the 1967 peak, actual membership was probably just below 5,000. The issue of membership cards for
        that year (membership cards lasted for a calendar year and the renewal of cards was called a "card exchange" or
        "card issue") had been largely postal and the normal 20% turnover rate was not realistically faced up to until
        1968. In this period, the <abbr title="Communist Party of Great Britain">CPGB</abbr> tended to have a turnover
        rate of half that of the <abbr title="Young Communist League">YCL</abbr>, remarkably stable in
        terms of leftist political groups. (Significantly the turnover rate of the <abbr
            title="Communist Party of Great Britain">CPGB</abbr> in the 1980s became very high
        indeed.) Paradoxically, whilst it was at its most vigorous for years that summer of 1967, the League was already
        in decline, but did not know it.
    </p>
    <p>There are other considerations as to the accuracy of membership figures. A considerable overlap always existed
        between the Party and the League. Although some young communists over the minimum age of 18 years did not always
        also join
        the Party, while those that did could get counted twice in any attempt to assess the overall strength of British
        Communism. More relevant to the League as an organisation was that its greatest difficulty was the 'shooting
        star' syndrome. That is to say frequent, wild and sudden upsurges of activity as a new and enthusiastic recruit
        directed the pace of events at a local level. Posed against this positive, if typically youthful feature, were
        the big drops associated with the loss of a particularly valued cadre.
    </p>
    <p>Unlike the Party, the <abbr title="Young Communist League">YCL</abbr> never had the luxury of a stable leadership
        at any level of its organisation. Perhaps
        this was partly due to the very nature of young people. Intensely mobile in social, geographical, occupational
        and personal terms as they are. Such phenomena gave rise to an uneven pace of development and/or decline in
        particular sectors of the organisation, accentuated most sharply in times of decline.
    </p>
    <p>However, the absence of a clear policy of cadre development by both the League and the Party, coupled with an
        often puzzling and arbitrary - certainly inconsistent leadership policy with regard to the League by the
        Party contributed to instability. The <abbr title="Communist Party of Great Britain">CPGB</abbr> often neglected
        the League, but it never let it range free. The
        Party's leadership seemed often more concerned to weed out 'oppositionalists' from the <abbr
            title="Young Communist League">YCL</abbr>, especially was this
        so in 'purges' of Party members from leading positions in the League in 1973 and 1975. Individuals in a number
        of districts were pressured to a greater or lesser degree by Party functionaries to leave the <abbr
            title="Young Communist League">YCL</abbr>, either simply
        in spirit or by actually leaving their League membership to lapse, in favour of predominantly or completely
        working inside the Party. In this sense the League was always subject to arbitrary and artificial assaults on
        its ability to thrive, very rarely compensated for at all, but sometimes insufficiently compensated for by the
        periodic thrusting of young Party members into key roles in the League, without having 'grown up' within the
        organisation.</p>

</body>

</html>