<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html
  xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"
  xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops"
>
  <head>
    <title>Turning Rebels into Revolutionaries</title>
  </head>

  <body epub:type="chapter">
    <h1>Turning Rebels into Revolutionaries</h1>

    <p>
      The key notion of the League in the mid-Sixties was to translate the
      self-evident mass rebelliousness of the generation of young people then
      receiving a high profile in society at large, into Marxist-Leninist
      revolutionaries. Seizing on the mood of the times, the YCL launched its
      "The Trend is Communism" campaign in 1966. For which the leadership
      grouping became abused as being "Trendies" by the more traditional
      elements inside the League.
    </p>
    <p>
      400,000 gaily-coloured folders were produced and a full-time field worker
      sent out into the country, to tour the coffee bars. The League planned a
      novel approach for its 26th National Congress due in 1967 at Skegness, in
      keeping with this carefully cultivated image of modernity. One thousand
      delegates and visitors attended what was in fact an international youth
      festival, grafted onto the usual Congress. There were competitions in the
      arts - painting, poetry, short story writing, plays, photography,
      cartooning, song competition, even a beat group contest. Amongst the
      judges were the journalist and broadcaster Malcolm Muggeridge, Arnold
      Wesker the playwright and Adrian Mitchell, the poet. Positive though all
      this undoubtedly seemed, a debt of £1,097 was left owing to the Derbyshire
      Miners Holiday Camp after the event, a very large sum indeed at the time.
      This debt was not cleared by the YCL for four years and remained a source
      of embarrassment for Communists active in the NUM. (To gauge the
      seriousness of the debt, the figure should be multiplied by at least ten
      times to account for inflation.)
    </p>
    <p>
      This lively, enjoyable style began to be presented as an essential
      component of the League's policies. Even to the extent of YCLs in Bristol,
      London and Surrey organising coach trips to the seaside! The YCL in
      Manchester was able to get a team on 'Juke Box Jury' - a sort of
      forerunner of the 'Top of the Pops' - on BBC TV. Christian-Communist
      dialogues, debates with the Labour Party Young Socialists (LPYS) and Young
      Liberals, letters to the local press became a feature of YCL work. More
      solidly, the League also began to be deeply involved in solidarity work
      with other youth groups, around the issue of peace in Vietnam. The YCL
      launched the Medical Aid for Vietnam appeal in 1965 and was the first
      organisation to donate £1,000 in medical aid. Subsequently a national
      charity with very broad support was set up.
    </p>
    <p>
      A Youth for Peace in Vietnam Committee, uniting 14 national youth
      organisations was set up, although it did not have stable, parallel
      organisations at regional level. Against a background of rising concern at
      the appalling levels of death and injury to civilians in Vietnam as the US
      became more actively involved in bolstering up its puppet government, the
      League had little difficulty in mobilising interest in its independent
      activities on Vietnam. The YCL organised a 'US Out Of Vietnam' petition
      with a target of 100,000 signatures, and planned a culmination of the
      campaign with a demonstration to Downing Street to present the petition to
      the Prime Minister, Harold Wilson. Over the same weekend another jamboree
      was set up in the same vein as the Skegness congress. The Round House at
      Chalk Farm in London was taken over for an event encompassing poetry,
      films, arts exhibitions, theatre, dancing, jazz, folk music and so on.
    </p>
    <p>
      As the war progressed and the liberation forces made headway, for all the
      sophisticated military hardware of the USA, a wave of international
      resentment at the carnage emerged. Amongst young people in particular,
      interest in radical and revolutionary ideas grew apace. 1968 became a year
      famed for left-wing youthful protest. The flavour of YCL publications now
      took on a decidedly revolutionary, even military, character. The armed
      struggle as practised by Vietnam and Cuba were popular amongst many young
      people. Poster portraits of Che Guevara were all the rage.
    </p>
    <p>
      The Vietnamese had always insisted that the best form of solidarity would
      be for Communists in the advanced capitalist nations to press for their
      country's disassociation from the actions of the US in Vietnam, to breach
      the solidarity of capitalism. Only revolutionaries would be in favour of
      full-bloodied victory for the liberation forces and this line - of
      pressing for the British (Labour!) Government's disassociation from the US
      - proved popular. Opinion polls by 1968 were showing two-thirds support
      for such a proposal. In such a climate, and with a new phase of the war
      entered by a general offensive of the liberation forces in 43 urban
      centres in Vietnam, the YCL began to feel that it was
      <q>not sufficient to ask only for disassociation</q>.
    </p>
    <p>
      Groups that saw themselves as to the left of the CPGB/YCL did not accept
      this subtle approach. This saw the Medical Aid campaign as appealing to
      the widest sections, the disassociation campaign as building on this and
      the most advanced sections only being won on a position which accepted the
      military victory of the National Liberation Front (NLF) as the solution.
    </p>
    <p>
      This line led to severe tensions between Communists and leftist groups.
      Strongly influenced by the International Marxist Group (IMG) - notable
      personage, Tariq Ali - and the International Socialists (IS - later
      Socialist Workers Party or SWP) - notable personage, Paul Foot - was the
      Vietnam Solidarity Campaign. This body however contained a range of
      radical groups, including the YCL and the CPGB National Student Committee
      (CPNSC). It was symptomatic of the period that the Scottish YCL congress
      in 1968 invited a fraternal delegate from the VSC. Even so, he was
      strongly criticised for over-estimating the mobilising powers of his
      organisation and for
      <q
        >an under-estimation of the importance of other sections of the peace
        movement and the need to unite them in action</q
      >.<a epub:type="noteref" href="#note_0">*</a>
    </p>
    <aside id="#note_0" epub:type="footnote">
      YCL Internal Bulletin, hereafter YCLIB, September 1968
    </aside>
    <p>
      An international campaign for practical and material aid to Vietnam was
      launched by the World Federation of Democratic Youth set up in 1945 by
      delegates from 63 countries in London - a sort of latter-day Comintern,
      without the power, of YCLs and Marxist-Leninist youth organisations
      throughout the world. Ultra-leftists pondered upon the possibility of a
      reply of the kind of international solidarity shown in Spain in the
      Thirties, in the form of the International Brigades. Communists were more
      realistic and asked the Vietnamese what they needed. Foreign volunteers,
      untrained in jungle warfare and unfamiliar with the territory, the people
      and their language and culture, was the last thing required.
    </p>
    <p>
      Material aid in the struggle was however crucial. The
      <abbr title="World Federation of Democratic Youth">WFDY</abbr> campaign -
      entitled "Victory to the Vietnamese People for their Freedom, Independence
      and Peace" - was geared to raising money for the purchase of particular,
      militarily useful commodities, difficult to get hold of in war-torn
      Vietnam. Bicycles were a popular item to purchase, being easy to acquire
      in the west, yet possessing an unimaginable strategic value on the jungle
      trails. Supply lines from the more conventional warfare zones were very
      extended. To get medicines, food, ammunition and so on to the underground
      in US dominated areas was a very difficult task. Everything had to go by
      foot, so the bicycles, stripped down, were very useful as transporters of
      goods. But there was also a need for cameras, radios, typewriters and even
      motorcycles.
    </p>
    <p>
      The YCL entered this campaign with considerable gusto at all levels, and
      often brought considerable imagination to fund-raising as well as vigour.
      Leeds YCL bought rolls of cloth which would make uniforms for the NLF,
      Bristol and SE London aimed for a £250 motorbike each. Bletchley aimed for
      two transistor radios, Hatfield and Luton for a walkie-talkie set each,
      Stevenage for a field operation kit. There were scores and scores of
      bicycles - Dundee YCL for example bought 5, Coventry 3.
    </p>
    <p>
      Newcastle, which had been dormant for six months, collected £90, Bristol
      £80, Coventry £26, Manchester £30, Dundee £81, Croydon £30 - each of them
      in less than the first eight weeks. Eventually over £6,500 was raised and
      perhaps as a measure of the relative worth of this amount it would be well
      to bear in mind that a wage of £15 to £20 a week would considered very
      acceptable to most people at this time.
    </p>
    <p>
      A lorry was bought with which to collect all these items in a
      round-Britain celebratory tour. Over June 14th to July 19th 1968 a couple
      of dozen locations were visited. These were:
    </p>
    <ul>
      <li>Newcastle</li>
      <li>Stockton</li>
      <li>Hull</li>
      <li>Leeds</li>
      <li>Sheffield</li>
      <li>Liverpool</li>
      <li>Manchester</li>
      <li>Nottingham</li>
      <li>Leicester</li>
      <li>Wolverhampton</li>
      <li>Coventry</li>
      <li>Birmingham</li>
      <li>Scotland</li>
      <li>Luton</li>
      <li>Wales</li>
      <li>Bristol</li>
      <li>Oxford</li>
      <li>Southampton</li>
      <li>Brighton</li>
      <li>Chatham</li>
      <li>London</li>
    </ul>
    <p>
      The campaign partially climaxed in a 15,000 strong demonstration on July
      21 supported by 17 national organisations. While the material was
      transported by bus across Europe to Bulgaria, the YCL’s lorry having now
      become a write-off as a result of a road traffic accident. A second hand
      bus was secured as a replacement and, once safely there, the goods were
      presented, along with the aid from other
      <abbr title="World Federation of Democratic Youth">WFDY</abbr> affiliates,
      in symbolic ceremonies at the World Youth Festival then underway in the
      capital, Sofia. It was reported at the 27th Congress that a shipment of
      over £4,000 of goods had gone to Vietnam.
    </p>
    <p>
      However, without doubt, the culmination of the victory for Vietnam
      campaign was the October 27th 1968 demonstration. The YCL and the CPNSC
      participated with the VSC, IS, the Young Liberals and the British Peace
      Committee (a body strongly influenced by the Party which campaigned on
      questions of international security) in the October 27th Ad Hoc Committee
      - the only degree of unity feasible. Despite the provocative and
      irrational actions of a tiny number of Maoist-led demonstrators, which
      received significant press and media attention, some 250,000 marched
      peacefully in London. Rather stupid suggestions that this was the signal
      for a leftist putsch emanated from the gutter press, yet this was the
      biggest protest since the war probably, certainly since Suez.
    </p>
    <p>
      The atmosphere generated by all this, particularly the YCL's own
      solidarity campaign, laid the basis for much potential growth. 150 of the
      YCL's 200 branches took part in the campaign and no less than 323
      applications for membership were received nationally during this period.
      This was very important for the YCL, which had begun to appreciate severe
      membership problems.
    </p>
    <p>
      The YCL saw the 1967-68 card exchange, as Colin Yardley reported to the
      YCL National Committee (NC) in March 1968, as
      <q>a serious set-back for us</q>. The League's 200 branches were in 19
      Districts, all but three of which had functioning District Committees.
      Comparing these to the last non-postal card issue, nine districts were up
      in membership, three were about the same and seven had suffered a loss.
      The two biggest districts, London and Scotland, had experienced severe
      losses.
    </p>
    <p>
      Nationally, the drop in 1966 was 16%, by 1968 it was 29%. Two year's
      losses almost had been collected in one year. Moreover, this was part of a
      long-term trend. There had not been a 100% result in the card issue for
      nine years, while the Average Dues Paying Membership (ADPM) - the value of
      membership stamps bought by districts from centre divided by official
      membership figures - was only 24% in 1967. The YCL congress felt obliged
      to note that "the decision to post cards to members has created more
      problems than it has solved".
    </p>
    <p>
      At the start of the card issue, the League noted in December 1967 that
      <q
        >many districts have reported losses through people going into the
        Party, through people moving and leaving no forwarding address. So far
        only a tiny amount of direct political losses have been reported.</q
      >
      It was thought that recruits could replace every loss.
      <q>If members are lost, then they must be replaced by new members.</q>
      Every branch was very strongly urged to achieve 100% membership.
      <q>Anything less</q>, wrote Barney Davis, the National Secretary of the
      YCL,
      <q
        >is not just a loss to the branch but a loss to the whole communist
        movement</q
      >.<a epub:type="noteref" href="#note_1">*</a>
    </p>
    <aside id="#note_1" epub:type="footnote">YCLIB No3 December 1967</aside>
    <p>
      There was thus a contradictory, confused yet still largely positive
      position. New branches were being formed all the time. Ebbw Vale, Bristol
      (Lawrence Weston), Balham, Barnsley, Dover, Hemel Hempstead, Wigan, Sale
      and several in Scotland were all reported as being set up by January 1968.
      While there were a number of branches making large numbers of recruits: -
      Mansfield 13, Bristol 22, Catford 15, St Pancras 13, Newham 12, Hampstead
      12 and Edinburgh 60.
    </p>
    <p>
      Birmingham YCL had an explosion of branches, 6 or 7 being set up out of
      one in no time at all, although it turned out that there was not a
      sufficiently strong basis for these. They were not maintained long and
      soon disintegrated back into the one. The YCL in Birmingham finished the
      card issue with 109 members, having made 20 recruits during the campaign.
      The district - the Midlands YCL - achieved 330 members by April 1st and
      was <q>recruiting 20 new members per month</q>. A district target of 600
      members in 30 branches might have been ambitious, but it did not seem
      unnecessarily unrealistic, even if later such targets became mechanical
      ambitions, from sheer enthusiasm. After all branches were springing up all
      over the place in the Midlands, as elsewhere.
    </p>
    <p>
      In January a Mid-Warwickshire branch was formed, based on Leamington and
      Rugby. In June, two branches of 10 members each were set up in
      Wolverhampton. A branch of 10 was established in Lichfield, which began
      working in Tamworth, Burton -on-Trent and Walsall, where there was a small
      group of five members needing encouragement. The aim of setting up a South
      Staffordshire organisation was decided upon.
    </p>
    <p>
      Groups emerged in the smallest of towns - Stourbridge (8 members),
      Worcester (8), Hereford (14). Political activity naturally reflected this
      mathematical increase. A Midlands YCL district school in the spring of
      1968 on the Party's programme, the <cite>British Road to Socialism</cite>,
      was organised with the expectation of getting some 45 in attendance, in
      the event 65 turned up! Three members of Birmingham YCL were involved in
      the Youth Parliament, an establishment body which involved a very wide
      range of youth organisations. Wolverhampton YCL was selling 50 copies of
      the YCL's paper, <cite>Challenge</cite>, in the first half of 1968, but
      400 in July.
    </p>
    <p>
      In the East Midlands, 25 delegates to the YCL's 4th District Congress in
      1967 heard how membership had rocketed from 127 in 1965 to 230 in 1967 in
      7 new branches. Though how much of this reflected the postal card issue is
      naturally a factor to be born in mind.
    </p>
    <p>
      At the 26th National Congress there had been much concern at the position
      in Wales, traditionally a strong area for Communism - in the mining
      valleys at least. In the Sixties it had become a "very weak area and on
      the verge of collapse" for the YCL. More positive was the fact that the
      Welsh YCL had been able to organise a weekend school with 12 present from
      4 branches, the average age of those attending being 19 years 2 months.<a
        epub:type="noteref"
        href="#note_2"
        >*</a
      >
    </p>
    <aside id="#note_2" epub:type="footnote">YCLIB September 1967</aside>

    <p>
      A little late in the day, the North East YCL was reformed in 1970, but
      rapidly doubled membership and tripled Challenge sales, with new branches
      at Darlington and Sunderland. The West of England District Congress held
      in September 1968 was the first for 12 years. During the course of that
      year the district had achieved the fastest rate of growth of any. There
      were now 93 members, 60 of whom were recent recruits. Bristol Central YCL
      was selling 600 Challenge - enormous for a branch of about 20 members. The
      20 delegates at the congress came from 5 branches in this widely
      scattered, largely rural district.
    </p>
    <p>
      Yorkshire YCL was 267 strong in 1966, but mushroomed to 422 in the
      following year, with three branches alone in Leeds. South East Midlands
      doubled in size in one year, reaching nine branches. The Scottish YCL
      Congress in May 1968 was attended by 76 delegates from 24 branches,
      together with some 30 odd consultative and fraternal delegates, yet this
      represented a weaker position than the previous congress two and a half
      years before. Then there had been 100 delegates. This reflected a severe
      organisation weakness, akin to that experienced by Wales. 500 members had
      been lost and the full-time YCL District Secretary's position was reduced
      to that of a part-timer. (Doug Bain had been the full-timer from 1963 to
      1968, Andy Sweeney was the part-time replacement.)
    </p>
    <p>
      The Scottish YCL spent the next couple of years grappling with what was
      essentially a financial problem. The League, perhaps like the Party, in
      Scotland had real and popular support in some areas, but translating what
      was often a family, almost tribal, commitment into organised activity was
      another matter. Both the Midlands and the Yorkshire YCLs planned
      full-timers, but only the latter was able to achieve this by creating a
      full-time post which was in fact jointly part-time with the Yorkshire
      Communist Party. Generally it was only through such mechanisms that the
      YCL could fund district full-timers. Whilst the CPGB part-funded the YCL
      nationally by means of a "grant", the districts were obliged to raise
      their own finances and usually were only treated to implicit subsidy by
      the Party, perhaps for example by writing off literature debts to CP owned
      bookshops.
    </p>
    <p>
      Like the Party, the League saw left unity as being built to the extent to
      which the CPGB and the YCL grew in size and influence.
      <q
        >The paramount task is to lay the basis for the immediate and rapid
        growth of the Young Communist League … The revolutionary character of
        every young communist must now be tested by his or her part in achieving
        the 4,000 membership in this 1970 card exchange.</q
      >
      This was how the YCL national leadership put it, just as it became clear
      that the 1968 bubble had burst.
      <a epub:type="noteref" href="#note_3">*</a>
      Motivating much of the YCL's work was a belief in the special
      revolutionary character of youth. As George Bridges put it:
      <q
        >Youth are free from reformist illusions. They develop new uninhibited
        forms of activity immediately corresponding with their mood</q
      >.<a epub:type="noteref" href="#note_4">*</a> This concept underlay a
      blind faith that mass membership was there to be won and it would only
      take hard work to achieve it.
    </p>
    <aside id="#note_3" epub:type="footnote">YCLIB January 1970</aside>
    <aside id="#note_4" epub:type="footnote">
      George Bridges August 1969 Marxism Today
    </aside>
    <p>
      Size became an all-important feature of the League's work and as the
      organisation did not gear itself to consistent long-term work, immediate
      startling publicity became the most sought-after objective. That is to
      say, imaginative events that attracted national, establishment media
      attention. Bob Allen, London YCL District Secretary, and Tony McNally, YCL
      National Organiser, late in 1969 protested outside a seminar of British
      generals against their suggestion to re-introduce conscription, in such a
      way that Fleet Street took notice. With membership at 3,686 in November
      1969 - 2,300 down on the 1967 position, a thousand down on 1968 - the
      League began to become more than a little concerned. The number of
      branches was down to 181 in April 1969.
    </p>
    <p>
      The aim of 4,000 members was established as a supposedly realistic
      benchmark and 100,000 recruitment leaflets produced, as the organisation
      set itself to remedying the problem. But there were serious internal
      difficulties that were in part a product of long-term decline, but were
      also largely the cause of fundamental damage to the organisation in the
      1970s. These arose out of the sharpening political differences which were
      to, as Doug Chalmers, the then YCL General Secretary put it at the 1983
      CPGB Congress, <q>to paralyse the work of League</q>.<a
        epub:type="noteref"
        href="#note_5"
        >*</a
      >
      These differences were eventually treated in so fractious a manner as to
      cause outright personal hostility between individuals of such a character
      that the work of the organisation was de-stabilised. But it was not always
      so.
    </p>
    <aside id="#note_5" epub:type="footnote">
      Author's personal contemporary notes
    </aside>
    <p>
      Amongst the tutors at a YCL national school in October 1967 were Sid
      French and Eric Trevett, the Surrey full-timers for the Party, long-time
      critics of the <abbr title="British Road to Socialism">BRS</abbr>'s
      programme of parliamentary transition without civil war and eventual first
      and second leaders of the breakaway New Communist Party. Their presence at
      the school ensured that
      <q
        >the discussion thrived and even became heated. In fact … it was
        generally felt that some of the tutors were more 'off the line' than the
        students</q
      >, commented the YCL's internal bulletin rather mildly. Such a
      possibility—of major dissidents lecturing a national cadre school—would
      later become unthinkable.<a epub:type="noteref" href="#note_6">*</a>
    </p>
    <aside id="#note_6" epub:type="footnote">YCLIB December 1967</aside>
    <p>
      Dissent was tolerated sufficiently for one participant on a 40 strong YCL
      organised holiday trip to the Soviet Union to comment in the bulletin in
      the following terms.
      <q
        >There were no holds barred in our talks and our Russian hosts spoke
        freely about issues on which their country has been heavily criticised
        in the West… on the question of the treatment of the Jews in the Soviet
        Union, which was raised in a British Communist Party statement, they
        (i.e. the Soviets) were all agreed that our party had been duped by
        capitalist press reports.</q
      >
      <a epub:type="noteref" href="#note_7">*</a>
    </p>
    <aside id="#note_7" epub:type="footnote">
      YCLIB December 1967 - article by Mike Ambrose
    </aside>
    <p>
      There would be little of such comment—other than in a letter printed to
      reveal the quirkiness of the dissidents—in YCL publications in the 1970s
      and beyond. Articles sympathetic to the Soviet Union would be excluded as
      'not being of interest to young people' and individuals who differed with
      the League leadership on these questions would find themselves excluded
      from leadership roles. Some YCLers adopted pro-soviet views that
      conflicted with reality as even seen by the Communist Party of the Soviet
      Union, but the process of squeezing fundamentalist assessments out of the
      League even inhibited balanced—and accurate—analyses and reinforced a
      cynical but vigorous anti-Sovietism in the leadership.
    </p>
    <p>
      The Party and the League had of course been no strangers to political
      dissent, particularly arising from the need to protect the organisation
      from outside interference and policies. There had been a brief period of
      Trotskyist involvement in some YCL branches when the Socialist Labour
      League (later Gerry Healey's Workers' Revolutionary Party - WRP) had
      infiltrated cadres. Then the split between China and the Soviet Union had
      resulted in the whole new tendency of Maoism, which actively sought to
      split and infiltrate Communist movements. The YCL had its share of trouble
      from these quarters. There had been plenty of tensions and differences
      before, over major policy questions, but minority opinions had usually
      been minuscule. Most of those who had left over Hungary had done simply
      that, resigned or lapsed from membership. Factionalism, whether informal
      or semi-organised, had not been strongly evident in British Communism for
      the bulk of its existence. (Early Trotskyite internal dissent had been
      marginal.) So the ruthless crushing of different views inside the
      organisation, by ostracising large numbers of branches or even whole
      Districts, had not been an obvious feature of Party life. The much
      publicised prohibition, a decade before, of Party members such as Edward
      Thompson from publishing a non-Party journal, the New Reasoner, had led to
      a small number leaving to involve themselves in the New Left. No
      leadership led wholesale purge of dissent had ever occurred and there had
      been little need for administrative action to silence critics. There had
      been differences of course, largely at leadership level and consequently
      much internalised, and these had often been debated with sharpness, but
      personal vindictiveness was not a hallmark of the CPGB/YCL at that stage.
    </p>
    <p>
      As J R Campbell had told the Comintern functionary, Manuilsky,
      <q
        >it is not the tradition of the British Communist Party to divide the
        Party into goats and sheep.</q
      >
      Manuilsky replied by comparing unfavourably the British Communists with
      the Germans who allowed
      <q
        >no deviation from the line, they attack the least deviation, respect no
        persons… Yet in the British Communist Party there is a sort of special
        system which may be characterised thus: the Party is a society of great
        friends…</q
      ><a epub:type="noteref" href="#note_8">*</a>
      What went for the Party in a traditional sense also went for the YCL of
      course.
    </p>
    <aside id="#note_8" epub:type="footnote">
      Noreen Branson "History of the Communist Party of Great Britain 1927-1941"
      pp45-6 (1985).
    </aside>
    <p>
      However, questions of democracy in socialist countries, attitudes to
      errors and distortions, controversies, differences in social, historical
      or political traditions between the western liberal-democratic style and
      the rather more basic aspirations of second and third world peoples, all
      became highly significant debating points in the YCL. Indeed in the Party
      also, even if the latter took a more restrained view of things.
    </p>
    <p>
      Without doubt, the single most significant happening in this period, which
      forced along the pace of division inside the YCL, was the Warsaw Pact
      intervention in Czechoslovakia in 1968. The YCL immediately distinguished
      itself as having a sharper line than the Party did. The CPGB characterised
      the affair as an "intervention"; the YCL preferred the more emotive
      "invasion". The Party sedately called for district aggregates to debate
      the matter behind closed doors in sombre, thoughtful discussions. The
      Midlands aggregate was enlivened by a call from one of the leading YCLers
      of the time, later a pillar of the Birmingham Labour Party, for the CP's
      resignation from the Comintern, which had of course been dissolved in
      1943!
    </p>
    <p>
      The YCL leadership saw their position as more clear-cut, less a case of
      debating the matter in the branches as "Fighting For The Line", as a
      series of articles in the Internal Bulletin put it. Moreover, for the
      League it was less a case of making careful condemnatory press statements
      concentrating on matters of high diplomatic and international legal
      principles and tenets, and much more a case of campaigning to distance the
      organisation from the Soviet Union. An Emergency National Committee of the
      YCL decided to organise a series of public meetings in solidarity with
      Czechoslovakia - or at any rate Dubcek's Czechoslovakia.
      <cite>Challenge</cite> came out with a front cover irreverently and
      irrelevantly decorated by a psychedelically dressed young woman who
      informed the reader that:
      <q
        >If you think Communism means that tanks can roll in at anytime, you're
        bloody wrong.</q
      ><a epub:type="noteref" href="#note_9">*</a>
    </p>
    <aside id="#note_9" epub:type="footnote">
      Magazine Series: Issue No 9.
    </aside>
    <p>
      Nonetheless more weighty matters had to be borne in mind at the 27th
      National Congress of the YCL in Scarborough in April 1969, when the policy
      of the League had to be put to the test. Despite the distortions of
      popular myth in the YCL in the 1970s, the conflicting positions actually
      voted on at the Congress were not baldly for or against the actions of the
      USSR and its allies. The National Committee's sharp characterisation of
      the affair as an invasion was actually faced with an alternative position
      of opposition to the events on the basis of international communist
      principles. An alternative motion from Harrow supported the Communist
      Party of Czechoslovakia and the other Warsaw Pact powers, on the basis of
      their statement after the events of the summer of 1968. This jointly
      agreed Czech-Soviet position largely affirmed much of the demands in the
      NC resolution for a spirit of harmony. There was no simple choice - oppose
      the 'intervention/invasion' or support it, for the congress reflected the
      more complex realities of Communist life. Many, on all sides, later
      reflecting on that Congress simply forgot that.
    </p>
    <p>
      The policy of the League on Czechoslovakia was increasingly seen as a
      totem, perhaps even to the extent that the actual nature of the policy was
      less relevant than its observance. For the CPGB, the whole issue was a
      question of a fundamental and principled difference over the nature of
      territorial integrity between socialist states. This was a difficult
      question for believers in world socialism. Strictly speaking, differences
      over the question need not necessarily colour other areas of work. Yet,
      for the YCL, attitudes to Czechoslovakia became a substitute for support
      or otherwise of the concept of a mass League; i.e. a YCL of size and
      influence working for socialism within the
      <abbr title="British Road to Socialism">BRS</abbr>'s tactics and strategy.
    </p>
    <p>
      Differences in the League over the mass YCL concept actually became
      confused as positions polarised. London full-timer for the YCL, Laureen
      Mason (later Hickey) put it well. While complaining about the
      <q>eternal labelling of individuals in one camp or another</q> (a case of
      goats and sheep?), she argued that
      <q
        >it is possible for instance for a member to believe the Soviet Union
        were correct about Czechoslovakia but still play a positive role in the
        league.</q
      ><a epub:type="noteref" href="#note_10">*</a> Others in the YCL's
      leadership thought differently.
    </p>
    <aside id="#note_10" epub:type="footnote">
      YCL Pre-Congress Discussion Document 1971
    </aside>
    <p>
      Indeed, there is a sense in which Czechoslovakia became a matter almost of
      obsession to the leadership of the YCL, exceeding the relevance of the
      issue to young people in a continuing way far into the 1970's. At its
      crudest, the obsession was based on a simple belief that the events of
      1968 had cost the League its popularity. That the membership problems
      which soon emerged in a most obvious way were inter-linked somehow with a
      juxtaposition of the '68 spirit. YCL national leader for nearly all of the
      next decade, Tom Bell, made his view clear as early as 1970.
      <q
        >The invasion of Czechoslovakia set us back more than we realise.
        Thousands of young rebels who could have been won to the YCL were turned
        to Ultra-Leftism and cynicism, they less than ever looked to the Soviet
        Union for inspiration.</q
      ><a epub:type="noteref" href="#note_11">*</a> Bell made a similar point in
      the YCLIB in January 1971 concerning death sentences, albeit subsequently
      withdrawn, of would-be Jewish plane hijackers. The affair had received
      hysterical press condemnation and the whole was assessed by Bell thus:
      <q>our struggle has been made harder</q>.
    </p>
    <aside id="#note_11" epub:type="footnote">
      Cogito No1 1970 "Time for Change
    </aside>
    <p>
      The League issued statement after statement on Czechoslovakia, following
      events there with dogged persistence. After the congress had endorsed the
      NC's position, the leadership issued a statement in September 1969. There
      was another in April 1970, expressing concern at the Czech Party
      disciplining Dubček and his associates. (This statement was endorsed by
      the NC on a vote of 15 to 5, with one abstention.) There was another in
      March 1971, another in August 1972, and another in October 1976. The
      latter statement was in protest at trials of rock musicians in Prague. In
      a calculated rebuff to the Czech YCL (the SSM, or Czechoslovak Socialist
      Youth Movement), it was decided not to actually go so far as to sever
      normal relations with that organisation but to refuse the offer of
      exchange delegations. Another statement came out in February 1977, when
      the YCL decided to look into the possibility of affiliating to Amnesty
      International. The tenth anniversary of the 1968 events was marked by the
      YCL by a special statement and an article in <cite>Challenge</cite> - most
      YCL members by that stage would have been in primary school when the
      Dubček government was in power.
    </p>
    <p>
      Differences of the kind experienced by the YCL occurred in other
      countries, although these, where they were exaggerated by special
      conditions, could explode into splits which in turn posed problems for
      fraternal organisations. For example, which grouping to support?
    </p>
    <p>
      In common with the vast majority of Communist Parties and Youth Leagues in
      the world, the British Party and YCL were estranged from the Chinese
      during the Sixties. The Chinese YCL representative at Budapest to the
      World Federation of Democratic Youth was "withdrawn" as the YCL Internal
      Bulletin put it, rather ominously perhaps. Like most YCLs, the British
      organisation had "some difficulty" in locating the Chinese YCL, refusing
      to recognise the Red Guards as a formal organisation, so the YCLGB simply
      lost touch. Concern over maintaining relations noticeably rose in the
      early 1970s, as the tensions over Czechoslovakia mounted, the leadership
      grew more anxious to prove that it was not coat-tailing Moscow by
      appearing open-minded over China. In 1970 the YCL felt impelled to
      specifically state that for its forthcoming Congress
      <q>fraternal delegates from overseas be invited, including Chinese.</q
      ><a epub:type="noteref" href="#note_12">*</a> Although this was later
      qualified to make it clear that such a Chinese organisation be the
      <q>Communist youth organisation if it existed.</q
      ><a epub:type="noteref" href="#note_13">*</a>
    </p>
    <aside id="#note_12" epub:type="footnote">YCLIB 18th November 1970</aside>
    <aside id="#note_13" epub:type="footnote">
      YCL 28th Congress documents 1971
    </aside>
    <p>
      In Australia, the Communist Party and YCL moved rapidly through Maoist and
      Trotskyist influences, only to find much of the trade union base of the
      movement splitting off after major expulsions into the Socialist Party of
      Australia and the Young Socialist League of Australia - seen as new
      replacement Marxist-Leninist organisations. The YCL in Britain had no
      difficulty in refusing to recognise the YSL in August 1974, despite the
      appearance of representatives of that body at
      <abbr title="World Federation of Democratic Youth">WFDY</abbr> meetings.
      Interestingly, the Australian Communist Party, at this stage certainly,
      preferred an analysis of the socialist states as being "post capitalist
      societies" or "socialist based".
    </p>
    <p>
      In Greece, differences over the conduct of the anti-fascist struggle
      against the army junta then in control, merged with international
      controversies inside the Communist movement. Two Communist parties and
      youth organisations emerged, but here - partially because of certain
      strong links with the British Party on the part of both groups - the CPGB
      decided to maintain relations with both. The YCL was loath to follow such
      a course, having strong political allegiances to the revisionist student
      movement, Rigeos Ferros - which was what later would be called the
      Euro-Communist tendency. The Communist Youth of Greece (KNE) had many
      contacts in London, not the least through the strong Cypriot presence
      there - a presence which had always been dominated by Communists. The
      YCLGB decided in June 1975 to keep contacts with both groups in line with
      the CPGB's position, but the League was cool with the KNE at national
      level, while the 'opposition' in the YCL was very much taken with it.
    </p>
    <p>
      Increasingly, the YCL found itself isolated along with a group, mainly
      west European, at
      <abbr title="World Federation of Democratic Youth">WFDY</abbr> meetings
      which was distant and cool with the majority. Questions of Soviet policy
      were seen by this minority group as prime matters of concern. In
      consequence of the minority with which the Italians, Spanish, British,
      Japanese and others found themselves they began to query the role of
      <abbr title="World Federation of Democratic Youth">WFDY</abbr>.
    </p>
    <p>
      The periodic world gatherings of
      <abbr title="World Federation of Democratic Youth">WFDY</abbr> were every
      five years, with a general council meeting yearly in between. Mike Power,
      the British delegate to the 8th World Assembly in 1971, reported to the
      YCL that WFDY "had never really become a broad all embracing youth
      movement" and that there seemed "very little likelihood of it doing so".
      He felt WFDY to be "following a tired pattern". WFDY's recognition of both
      Greek youth movements was seen by him as "support to splitting
      activities". Moreover, the insistence of the majority of organisations in
      WFDY that the notion of peaceful "co-operation" between states be included
      in a statement on European security irked Power. Because of this he
      complained that it was "hard to decide whether the Assembly is a gathering
      of international youth against imperialism, or a meeting of young
      diplomats". Power saw the fight for European security as "a class battle
      and part of the struggle for socialism".<a
        epub:type="noteref"
        href="#note_14"
        >*</a
      >
      Rather ironically, the early 1980s debate about the direction the Party
      should take was initially and partially symbolically centred on whether
      peace is a class issue or a democratic issue. Mike Power subsequently
      became the editor of the short-lived Democratic Left's even shorter-lived
      journal <cite>New Times</cite>.
    </p>
    <aside id="#note_14" epub:type="footnote">
      YCL NC Minutes January 2/3 1971
    </aside>
  </body>
</html>
