<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html
  xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"
  xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops"
>
  <head>
    <title>World Youth Festivals</title>
  </head>

  <body epub:type="chapter">
    <h1>World Youth Festivals</h1>
    <p>
      The most significant role of WFDY was to organise the massive cultural and
      political festivals held periodically in differing parts of the world.
      There have been 12 Festivals: Prague (1947), Budapest (1949), Berlin
      (1951), Bucharest (1953), Warsaw (1955), Moscow (1957), Vienna (1959),
      Helsinki (1962), Sofia (1968), Berlin (1973), Cuba (1978), and Moscow
      (1983) A festival usually had around sixteen thousand participants at it,
      although the 1973 Berlin Festival touched 26,000. From the original 63
      founding countries of WFDY, it had affiliates from 72 countries at its
      first festival and 112 by the 1959 Vienna event. These festivals aimed to
      involve youth organisations other than of the Communists and were moreover
      always spectacular in character - a memorable event in each generation's
      experience.
    </p>
    <p>
      Some 14 organisations were involved in the Sofia 1968 British Preparatory
      Committee, the link up with the Vietnam campaign making this possible.
      Organisations like the Young Liberals, Young Oxfam and the Student
      Christian Movement joined up with the YCL in sending some 300 delegates to
      Bulgaria. The League saw this as an especially important development for
      its work in Britain. So much so that it approached the 1973 Berlin
      Festival with great plans for massive broad youth unity in the British
      Preparatory Committee, one thousand delegates were aimed for. Already, the
      previous year, a Vietnam Youth Committee had been set up under the
      auspices of the British Campaign for Peace in Vietnam. This brought
      together the National Union of Students (NUS), the Young Liberals, the
      Amalgamated Union of Engineering Workers (Technical and Supervisory
      Staffs) (AUEW/TASS), the United Nations Youth and Students Association and
      of course the YCL. All of these organisations and others were easily won
      to involvement in the World Youth Festival, the NUS being a particularly
      important body. The NUS had supported the 1947 Youth Festival, but had not
      done so since due to governmental and other pressures associated with the
      cold war.
    </p>
    <p>
      Apart from some tensions within the British delegation arising out of the
      presence of a Gay Liberation banner, the whole event did much to break
      down barriers artificially erected by the cold war. (The banner had been
      rather frowned upon by the East Germans, but supported vigorously on a
      point of principle by both the Young Liberals and the YCL national
      leadership, perhaps with tactical considerations back home being very much
      in the collective mind of the latter.) Major changes in the official youth
      movement in Britain were on their way. Together with the positive gains of
      the Berlin Festival, these laid the basis for even more significant unity.
      The main resolution at the YCL's 29th Congress in 1973 saw "the
      preparations (as) an example of the broad youth unity, albeit embryonic"
      that it sought generally in Britain.
    </p>
    <p>
      Of tremendous significance for the next World Youth Festival after Berlin
      was the disaffiliation of the British Youth Council (BYC) from WFDY's cold
      war rival, the World Assembly of Youth (WAY). This was to open up the
      possibility of much wider involvement in youth unity activities. It had
      become public knowledge that WAY had been at least partially funded by the
      CIA for much of its life and the BYC's links with that body grew more and
      more tenuous. The BYC itself had been set up in 1949 and it was funded by
      various British government departments, as well as by the subscriptions of
      the affiliated organisations. These included such groups as the Boy
      Scouts, Girl Guides, Boys’ Brigades, Young Farmers, Young Conservatives
      and a variety of Christian youth organisations, as well as the Labour
      Party Young Socialists and the Young Liberals. In 1976, with the link with
      WAY now dissolved, the YCL and other progressive organisations like the
      Co-operative movement's Woodcraft Folk, the NUSS and the National
      Organisation of Labour Students (NOLS) all decided to affiliate to the
      BYC. At his first attempt, Tom Bell narrowly failed to obtain election to
      the executive committee of the BYC.
    </p>
    <p>
      Preparations for the 11th World Youth Festival, to be held from Friday
      28th July to Saturday 5th August, were already underway and it was clear
      that, especially with it being held in Cuba, that there would have to be a
      tremendous effort to avoid the massive organisational and travelling
      difficulties. Indeed the Festival was put back a year to allow for all of
      this. 23,000 delegates - 18,500 from outside Cuba - from 145 countries
      were expected, along with 1,000 journalists. There were 3,200 from West
      Europe, 800 from Africa, 3,800 from the Americas, 1,600 from Asia, 800
      from the Middle East, 1,000 from the USSR, 750 from the GDR (East Germany)
      and 3,050 from East Europe. After an initial expectation of a higher
      number, it eventually became clear that the British delegation would only
      number 180 and it would cost £310 to send each one.
    </p>
    <p>
      The BYC agreed to participate in the Festival on the understanding that
      the British Preparatory Committee would support the right of its
      individual member groups to raise whatever issues they wished and that the
      BPC itself raise certain issues of controversy with respect to democracy
      in socialist states. The BYC was under great pressure before the event
      from the Federation of Conservative Students and the Young Conservatives
      to withdraw its support, indeed these groups themselves refused to
      participate. Even so, several Tories remained on the delegation as
      representatives of the Churches, in particular in the Methodist camp.
      While the Foreign Office refused to give a £5,000 grant for a cultural
      delegation from Britain.
    </p>
    <p>
      The NUS was to play a particularly important part in this BPC. Charles
      Clarke, who had recently been the National President of the NUS, landed
      the job of permanent British representative in Havana for a year before
      the Festival. While the leader of the delegation was Trevor Phillips, 24
      year old NUS President. His deputy was Peter Mandelson, noted then only
      for being personally related to the former Labour Home Secretary, Herbert
      Morrison and tipped, like Phillips, to go on to greater things. (Mandelson
      had been a member of the London YCL for about nine months in the early
      1970s.) 
    </p>
    <p>
      For both of these the whole affair was an important test. As the Sunday
      Telegraph, rather bluntly put it, "both plan careers in mainstream
      politics, and Mr Mandelson felt that a heavily Stalinist British
      contribution in Havana could have serious career repercussions for him.
      Messrs Phillips and Mandelson, therefore, were determined that Britain
      would raise the issue of human rights." \[Sunday Telegraph August 6th
      1978\] In particular, they planned that leaflets on the status of Soviet
      dissidents, Shcharansky and Orlov, should be distributed at the Festival.
      Mandelson, of course, notoriously became Labour's key media man under the
      Kinnock leadership; Clarke was the key figure in Kinnock's personal
      political advisory team. Phillips went on to become a TV producer and
      occasional presenter. All three ended up as key figures in the Blair
      project.
    </p>
    <p>
      In a heavy-handed move of supremely unconscious irony, the BPC leadership
      decided to rid itself of any delegates who would be too obviously opposed
      to the plan to seek publicity for an anti-Soviet position. What
      involvement there was on the part of the YCL in the original calculations
      remains undefined, but how else could the non-communist leadership of the
      BPC be aware of identity of the most outspoken Communists hoping to be
      part of the delegation? Who told Phillips and Mandelson which were the key
      people to exclude? Whatever the position, seven CPGB and NCP members were
      literally banned from going to Cuba. Trevor Phillips, as Chair of the BPC,
      and Tom Bell, as its Secretary, wrote to at least three of these who then
      made the whole affair public. They were Dave Smith (ASTMS), Will Gee (FBU)
      and Lysandras Lysandrou (United Cypriot Youth Organisation - EKON).
    </p>
    <p>
      They were told that there were travel difficulties and that as they were
      nominated by organisations not in membership of the BPC and that the
      "trade union section of the delegation is already fairly heavily
      subscribed to" it was not possible to accept their nomination. More
      decisively, and the strongest clue to where the objections were coming
      from, "it has been questioned by a member organisation of the BPC whether
      your approach to the Festival, given the basis of your past political
      record and activity would be entirely in line with the tenets and spirit
      of British participation in the Festival, as agreed and delineated by the
      British Preparatory Committee". \[Letter dated 14th July 1978\] Which
      "member organisation" was not publicly revealed, but clearly
      non-communists could only be aware of what was essentially a criticism of
      their differences with the YCL's line on socialist democracy from the YCL
      leadership.
    </p>
    <p>
      After receiving the Phillips-Bell letter, two of the excluded met with the
      BPC's organising committee and offered to travel by other means, if
      travelling was the problem. The committee voted by 3 to 1 not to reverse
      their exclusion - leaving the matter of their political suitability as the
      key objection. A simple reference to the balance of the delegation reveals
      a high proportion of students and a rather small trade union delegation.
    </p>

    <table>
      <thead>
        <tr>
          <th>Student Bodies</th>
          <th></th>
        </tr>
      </thead>
      <tbody>
        <tr>
          <td>National Union of Students</td>
          <td>38</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
          <td>National Union of School Students</td>
          <td>1</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
          <td>Communist Party National Students Committee</td>
          <td>3</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
          <td>National Organisation of Labour Students</td>
          <td>3</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
          <td>Student Christian Movement</td>
          <td>4</td>
        </tr>
      </tbody>
    </table>

    
<table border="1" cellpadding="0" cellspacing="0"><tbody><tr><td style="width:379px;"><h4><strong>Trade Unions</strong></h4></td></tr><tr><td style="width:379px;">&nbsp;</td></tr><tr><td style="width:379px;">AUEW/TASS (engineering workers and staff) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;4</td></tr><tr><td style="width:379px;">ACTT&nbsp; (cinema technicians)&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;1</td></tr><tr><td style="width:379px;">EEPTU (electricians)&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp; 1&nbsp;</td></tr><tr><td style="width:379px;">ASTMS (managers/technicians)&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp; 2</td></tr><tr><td style="width:379px;">NUT (teachers)&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;4</td></tr><tr><td style="width:379px;">NUPE (public employees)&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;2</td></tr><tr><td style="width:379px;">NUM (miners)&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;5</td></tr><tr><td style="width:379px;">AUEW (engineers)&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;1</td></tr><tr><td style="width:379px;">AUT (university lecturers)&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;1&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</td></tr><tr><td style="width:379px;">TGWU (transport &amp; general)&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;5</td></tr><tr><td style="width:379px;">NATFHE (college lecturers)&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;1</td></tr><tr><td style="width:379px;">NALGO (local government)&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;1</td></tr><tr><td style="width:379px;">APEX (clerical workers)&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;1&nbsp;&nbsp;</td></tr><tr><td style="width:379px;">Greater London Association of Trades Councils &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;1</td></tr><tr><td style="width:379px;">Haringey Trades Council &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;1</td></tr></tbody></table>


<table border="1" cellpadding="0" cellspacing="0"><tbody><tr><td><h4><strong>Community and Miscellaneous Bodies</strong></h4></td></tr><tr><td>&nbsp;</td></tr><tr><td>Returned Volunteer Action&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; 1</td></tr><tr><td>Melting Pot Foundation &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; 1</td></tr><tr><td>British Council of Churches - Youth Unit &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; 4</td></tr><tr><td>CBSLC (identity unknown to author) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; 1</td></tr><tr><td>British Preparatory Committee &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; 10</td></tr><tr><td>Young Farmers &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; 1</td></tr><tr><td>BLF (identity unknown to author)&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; 1</td></tr><tr><td>Legal Staffs Association &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; 1</td></tr><tr><td>National Assembly of Women &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; 1</td></tr><tr><td>National Film School &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; 1</td></tr><tr><td>Afro-Caribbean Education Resource Project &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; 1</td></tr><tr><td>Community Service Volunteers &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; 1</td></tr><tr><td>Jubilee Hall Recreation Centre &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; 1</td></tr><tr><td>National Association of Indian Youth &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; 1</td></tr><tr><td>Southall Youth Movement &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; 2</td></tr><tr><td>Indian Youth Association &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; 2</td></tr><tr><td>EKON (Cypriot Youth)&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; 2</td></tr><tr><td>RCA Film School &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; 1</td></tr><tr><td>Woodcraft FoIk (Co-op)&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; 1&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</td></tr><tr><td>Cultural Delegation&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; 8</td></tr><tr><td>Young Friends (Quakers) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; 1</td></tr><tr><td>Women in Manual Trades Group &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; 1</td></tr><tr><td>National Association of Youth Clubs &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; 1</td></tr><tr><td>British Youth Council (BYC) &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; 5</td></tr></tbody></table>



<table border="1" cellpadding="0" cellspacing="0"><tbody><tr><td><h4><strong>Campaigning and Political Bodies</strong></h4></td></tr><tr><td>&nbsp;</td></tr><tr><td>YCL&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; 16</td></tr><tr><td>Labour Party &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; 2</td></tr><tr><td>LPYS&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; 4</td></tr><tr><td>Young Liberals &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; 4</td></tr><tr><td>Campaign Against Youth Unemployment (CAYU)&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; 1</td></tr><tr><td>Anti-Apartheid Movement &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; 1</td></tr><tr><td>Chile Solidarity Campaign &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; 1</td></tr><tr><td>Young European Left &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; 1</td></tr><tr><td>Namibia Support Committee&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; 1</td></tr><tr><td>Namibia International Peace Centre &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; 1</td></tr><tr><td>African National Congress &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; 1</td></tr></tbody></table>


<table border="1" cellpadding="0" cellspacing="0"><tbody><tr><td style="width:366px;"><h4><strong>SUMMARY</strong></h4></td></tr><tr><td style="width:366px;">&nbsp;</td></tr><tr><td style="width:366px;">Category&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; No.&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; %&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</td></tr><tr><td style="width:366px;">&nbsp;</td></tr><tr><td style="width:366px;">Student Bodies&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; 49&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; 30</td></tr><tr><td style="width:366px;">Trade Unions&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; 31&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; 19&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</td></tr><tr><td style="width:366px;">Political/Campaigning&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; 34&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; 21</td></tr><tr><td style="width:366px;">Community/Miscellaneous&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; 49&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; 30&nbsp;</td></tr><tr><td style="width:366px;"><strong>Total&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; 163&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; 100</strong></td></tr></tbody></table>

    <p>
      Given that travelling was not really the problem, although there were
      difficulties these were not insurmountable, and that if any group needed
      thinning down it was the student element of the delegation, how could the
      BPC's banning of the dissident element be justified? The community sector
      could not lend itself to reduction, as there were generally only one or
      two delegates per group. If the TGWU with two million members could be
      easily represented by 5 delegates, how could it be that the NUS with
      perhaps half or a third of that number needed 38 delegates? In truth,
      delegates were often simply people who had both the interest and the money
      to pay. Their sponsoring organisation had simply endorsed them as
      delegates, at no cost to the organisation. Apart from measures to ensure
      that each single organisation was at least once represented, very little
      tinkering with the overall delegation was really necessary. Therefore,
      there could only seriously remain the matter of the political objection.
      Two of the excluded delegates produced statements, revealing the full
      details of the affair, including copies of the correspondence. They
      declared that the BYC had given an ultimatum to the BPC to veto the likes
      of them and that they had been removed for political reasons "without any
      opportunity to reply to the allegations." In the Morning Star, Reuben
      Falber for the CPGB was pressed by their statement to publicly respond for
      the Party that it understood travel problems. But that it was regrettable
      that, in making the difficult decisions to thin down the delegation, it
      was implied that some were excluded because of their politics.
    </p>
    <p>
      Bob Lentell, speaking for the YCL as its National Organiser, made a
      similar point as Falber over the travel arrangements question. But the YCL
      had disagreements on some parts of the festival preparations and felt that
      the BPC, having laid down its political principles at an early stage, had
      the right to ensure "that the British delegation adhered to these
      principles". Implicit in this was some degree of sympathy for the
      exclusions.
    </p>
    <p>
      Tom Bell, in a subsequent article on the Festival in Challenge, conceded
      that the BPC "didn't handle every question as well as it might have done",
      but thought on balance the Festival overall was a positive development.
      While the exclusion of some people was not "handled in the best way" and
      some should have gone, Bell supported the right of the BPC to make the
      decision. \[Challenge No 55 1978\]
    </p>
    <p>
      For the vast majority of delegates the first they knew of the controversy
      was when they arrived in Cuba. The statements of the excluded two,
      together with the copies of correspondence were distributed in large
      numbers by their sympathisers amongst the delegation. After protracted
      arguments a delegation meeting at the large, modern teacher training
      college six kilometres from Havana, which the British shared with the
      Irish, Scandinavian and Low Countries delegations, passed a decisive
      resolution to bring over three individuals excluded from the delegation.
      Clive Haswell of the Welsh Preparatory Committee - two of the excluded
      were Welsh - moved that the steering committee running affairs in Cuba
      amongst the delegation be instructed to reverse the ban and make
      arrangements to get the three to the Festival.
    </p>
    <p>
      It had been necessary to propose a procedural motion to discuss the
      matter, despite an attempt by the steering committee to avoid this. Then
      the motion was narrowly passed.  Once the issues were debated the
      delegation voted 84 for the critical motion 50 against. It should be noted
      that 73 of the delegation were either absent or abstained. The decision
      was of course largely symbolic, the meeting being held on the first day of
      the Festival at 1pm on Friday 28th August, but it was symptomatic of a
      large gap between the steering committee and the delegation majority. The
      three never got to the Festival of course.
    </p>
    <p>
      This affair rather conditioned the atmosphere on the delegation and
      attitudes to the leadership of the steering committee, in particular the
      determination of Mandelson and Phillips to issue a delegation statement on
      human rights. A document, which bore all the hallmarks of a rushed and
      thoughtless composition, especially in the circumstances that the
      delegation now found itself, suddenly appeared. Very little consultation
      with very few people had prefaced its appearance, which drew much
      criticism. It was ill conceived and almost calculated to annoy most
      Communists.
    </p>
    <p>
      Bell, in his subsequent Challenge article, conceded that "while some
      delegates wanted more time to discuss the contents of the statement, a
      minority were determined to prevent it being issued at all … given the
      sectarian, Stalinist positions they held they were not prepared to accept
      any criticisms of the Soviet Union or other socialist countries.”
    </p>
    <p>
      The Sunday Telegraph reckoned that about half of the delegation –
      something like 80 odd people – were Communists, and their views varied.
      Many supported the CPGB’s position on socialist democracy, but were
      unhappy with the ease with which some allowed unbalanced positions to be
      postulated by the delegation leadership. Many, perhaps 30 to 40, were
      committed to one or another of the tendencies inside the British Communist
      movement, which repudiated the official position on these matters. An
      alliance between the two elements, winning support amongst the trade union
      and some Labour and progressive groupings, ensured that the delegation was
      deeply split.
    </p>
    <p>
      Some, especially those associated with anti-imperialist causes like
      Ireland, were strongly opposed even to the notion of carrying the Union
      Flag ahead of the British delegation's representatives on the opening
      ceremony's 'walk past'. While the discovery that the official, identifying
      T-shirts bore the Festival logo coloured in with the Union Flag created
      some controversy. Those who objected argued that the flag was associated
      in half of the world with bloody imperialism, a force which the Festival
      was specifically in opposition to. Those who favoured the Union Flag
      simply viewed it as the nation's official emblem, which was known to all.
    </p>
    <p>
      With all this, it is not surprising perhaps that the draft statement on
      human rights was greeted with hostility. Moreover, there was a time
      constraint that led to a feeling that the steering committee was trying to
      rush things. The BPC wanted the statement ready for a particular
      commission on the first Monday of the Festival. Despite an attempt to
      block the statement completely, the delegation voted to discuss the draft
      and to amend it by a vote of 64 to 60. (Noticeably, as the controversy
      raged, fewer and fewer people participated in the delegation meetings.) 30
      to 40 delegates then walked out to draft an alternative statement. The
      remainder, including many who differed with much of the intent, tone and
      content of the originating statement determined to change it.
    </p>
    <p>
      From 6.00 p.m. on Sunday 30th to 4.00 am on Monday 31st, during
      successive, strained and marathon sessions at the delegation’s lodgings,
      the statement was hotly debated and amended. The initial session by 6.30
      p.m. had agreed on the go-ahead. Then the YCL EC members met with the
      CPNSC members - as no doubt did other caucuses - drafting amendments which
      were in the main agreed to by the delegation leadership and, subsequently,
      the majority of the delegation as a whole, in a midnight to four am
      meeting.
    </p>
    <p>
      The original statement linked the Helsinki Declaration on Human Rights to
      détente, arguing that concern over human rights did not sabotage the fight
      for peace. Central to all this was the freedom of speech and assembly.
      Concern was expressed about the 1968 events in Czechoslovakia and the more
      recent experience of the Charter 77 group there. The case of Yuri Orlov in
      the USSR was raised and it was made clear that the British delegation
      would continue to campaign on these matters most firmly. All in all it was
      calculated and blunt - the intent being to clearly distance the British
      delegation from the socialist countries on issues of controversy in
      Western media. These participating nations would most certainly view the
      highly specific and selective statement as an intended insult in what was
      intended to be a Festival of friendship.
    </p>
    <p>
      The eventual amended version put these points a little more in context. A
      firm distinction between those who are "genuinely committed to both
      détente and human rights, and those who are exploiting the issue of human
      rights for their own political advantage" was made. Moreover, the absence
      of some fundamental human rights in Britain was noted, especially with
      regard to Northern Ireland. It was recognised that human rights also
      involved some fairly fundamental economic rights and the exploitation of
      developing countries by the advanced capitalist nations (not specified as
      such however) was a pre-requisite to human rights in that part of the
      world.
    </p>
    <p>
      The hypocrisy of the Western nations was thus signified in the revised
      statement. In particular, specific instances of abuses of human rights in
      the USA were mentioned, especially of black and indigenous American
      peoples. The original draft had called for the ending of racist political
      systems just in South Africa. This was implicitly widened to allow for the
      interpretation that this could apply to Britain also. The original had
      said that the delegation was opposed to particular imperialist
      interference from whatever quarter and this was softened to make it less
      an obviously contrived comment on the socialist as well as capitalist
      world. A positive note was also injected, linking anti-imperialist
      struggles throughout the world to the concrete solidarity organisations
      and actions traditionally associated with the British people. Criticisms
      of the USSR and South Africa had been made in the same breath, but were
      now separated and some positive features of Soviet life were incorporated,
      albeit that these were rather lamely highlighted. The previous
      condemnation of the Warsaw Pact intervention in 1968 in Czechoslovakia was
      turned into a statement of the fact that the intervention had been widely
      condemned in Britain. As was the criticism of the trial of Yuri Orlov,
      again, instead of the delegation being committed to condemn the USSR, it
      was observed that such criticisms had been made by some. While, finally,
      the previous commitment to campaigning on differences with the socialist
      world was eliminated.
    </p>
    <p>
      The minority produced their own statement, on behalf of "a large
      percentage of the British delegation" they dissociated themselves from the
      majority statement, which they identified as being issued by the BPC -
      which it had not been, even in the first instance, let alone after
      amendment by the delegation. The minority statement complained that the
      majority statement did not "represent the views of the youth and students
      of Great Britain". Moreover that the BPC since its inception had not taken
      the "wide ranging opinions of the British youth into account". The
      exclusions were referred to and it was stated that the BPC had not "taken
      actions based on majority decisions either here (in Havana) or in Great
      Britain". The spirit of the Festival was endorsed by the statement, with
      the implication that a minority of the delegation, especially in
      leadership positions, had other axes to grind.
    </p>
    <p>
      Not that this was the end of such controversies. Phillips, of course, made
      speeches and distributed leaflets of the statement. But the British
      delegation officially used its veto during one of the main debates against
      a Festival communiqué, stating that the capitalist countries were locked
      in a deepening economic crisis, from which the only escape could be
      profound political and social change. While women's liberationists
      distributed leaflets in Spanish, outlining their demands, which put
      attitudes to homosexuality that clashed sharply with the Cuban view then
      prevailing. (A more relaxed attitude now exists.) However, at no stage did
      the Cuban authorities or the World Preparatory Committee interfere with
      any of this. Other than a mild expression of displeasure by one of the
      Soviet representatives to Phillips at the discourtesy of the British
      delegation statement, there appears to have been only a feeling of
      bewilderment at the antics of the British by a number of delegations at
      the most and, at the least, a general lack of interest in what was largely
      an issue only for some on the British delegation.
    </p>
    <p>
      In Britain however there was some interest. The Times, in an editorial,
      generally welcomed the British delegation's official position - arguing
      that even the split within the delegation must have been a lesson, though
      a puzzling one, on the freedom to disagree. While the East Midlands
      District Committee of the CPGB was more worried about the affair and wrote
      as much to the YCL EC. The latter however was not impressed by the lesson
      on the right to disagree. Two of its delegates to Havana, one of who was
      from the East Midlands, were "no longer to be allowed to represent the YCL
      at any outside event, due to events that took place in Havana". \[YCL EC
      Minutes 14th/15th October 1978\]  They had of course been associated with
      the minority statement.
    </p>
    <p>
      Despite the trauma of these differences, the British involvement in the
      Festival had been positive and a wide degree of youth unity had been
      achieved around the ideas of world peace and friendship. Many cold war
      barriers had been broken down, but for some the question would naturally
      be posed - at what price for the YCL's own internal unity?
    </p>
    <p>
      Organisations as disparate as the BYC, the NUS, NOLS, the British Council
      of Churches, the Student Christian Movement, the National Association of
      Youth Clubs, the Young Liberals, Quakers, the school students union
      (NUSS), AUEW-TASS, Young European Left and the YCL had agreed to the
      statement on Détente, Peace and Human Rights. It had been issued in their
      names, not the BPC, however. Even though the BPC continued its work for a
      short while after the Festival, the YCL was edgy about its continued
      existence and ensured that its influence was brought to bear in winding up
      the organisation.
    </p>
  </body>
</html>
